May status update. (#12)
hpyproject/hpyproject.org: posts/2021/05/may-status-update.md

<!--
.. title: HPy Status Update
.. slug: may-status-update
.. date: 2021-05-07 10:00:00 UTC
.. author: hodgestar
.. tags:
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

HPy's first git commit was on Friday, 12 July 2019. Despite the crazy state
of the world, HPy has come a long way since then. This is a quick update
to say where we are now and what's planned for the immediate future.

<!--TEASER_END-->

What can one do with HPy right now?
===================================

> One can already port non-trivial Python extensions to the HPy API, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can already port non-trivial Python extensions compiled with the HPy API, but
```

Author: I think one "ports to"? One can't "port compiled with".

there is also still a lot of work to do. Things one can do right now
with HPy include:

  - Initialize an extension module
  - Create custom extension types
  - Create custom methods and functions
  - Interact with many built-in types (including dictionaries, tuples,
    lists, strings, bytes and longs)
  - Raise and check exceptions
  - Parse arguments to C functions
  - Call Python functions
  - Compile an extension in either "universal" or "cpython" modes (see below)
  - Put a "universal" extension into debug mode **at runtime** (see below
    for how this is possible without a performance penalty).

>   - Compile extensions for POSIX and Windows (MSC).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Compile extensions for POSIX and Windows (MSVC).
```

An extension written using HPy may be compiled either in "cpython" or

> "universal" mode:

Author: I prefer "modes" because for the reader the idea that they can compile an HPy extension they have written in two ways is easier to grasp. Succinctly explaining what exactly the ABIs in question are seems quite hard.

> "universal" mode:

Author: References to "modes" removed.

>   - "cpython" mode produces an ordinary Python C extension that only uses
>     the HPy API internally. From the point of view of the Python implementation
>     it is an ordinary Python C extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - "cpython" mode produces a c-extension that is fully compatible with current
    C-API c-extensions and is loaded via the standard import machinery.
```

Author: Your version is more technically precise, but I was aiming for something that readers of the blog post who aren't necessarily dealing with Python internals day to day would be able to read easily and gain the correct overall picture from.

  - "universal" mode produces an HPy C extension. This extension does not use
    the Python C API directly at all. A Python implementation must know how

>     to load such an extension and pass it an HPy context. Currently context

Reviewer: First mention of "context". Could you link to the definition of this term in the docs?

Author: Hmm. Good point. Let me think about how to address this nicely.

Author: Here too my guess is that many readers with read the words "HPy Universal ABI" and have no idea what they mean.

Author: I changed these to avoid mentioning the context and to refer to cpython and universal ABIs.

    implementations exist for CPython, PyPy and GraalPython.

Debug mode is implemented by replacing the HPy context with a debug mode
context at runtime. The debug context wraps the original context and tracks
all HPy API calls. Debug mode already supports finding handles that are
leaked (i.e. not closed) and handles that are used after being closed.
Additional debug features should now be fairly straightforward to add.

The debug mode is written using HPy itself, so its implementation can be
shared by different Python implementations that support HPy.

> 

Reviewer 2: We could mention `ujson_hpy` and `piconumpy_hpy` here as examples.

Author: Maybe @fangerer's suggestion somehow ended up on the wrong lines?

Author: I've left links to ultrajson and piconumpy out because I'm not sure enough of the state of them relative to the most recent HPy to recommend that people look at them without talking to us first.

What are the next steps?
========================

> The big picture is that we're working towards writing a Cython backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The big picture is that we're thinking about writing a Cython backend
```

Author: I prefer "working towards". "thinking about" sounds a bit too much like we're just thinking rather than writing code and heading in a direction.

and porting core features of numpy to HPy. There is still some way to go
but the immediate next steps planned are:

  - Implement ``HPyField``. HPy handles are always short lived. Often it
    is necessary to store long-lived references to Python objects though.
    For example, a custom type may wish to store an array containing
    references to Python objects, or have attributes that reference them.
    These long-lived references will be stored as ``HPyField``s, and can
    be thought of as a second type of handle. HPy handles are for short-lived

>     references. ``HPyFields`` are for long-lived references.

Author: Good point. I tried to keep the rest of the post clear of technical details and then suddenly typed a bunch of detail about HPyFields. Will fix.

  - Implement module level state. These will be primarily used to
    store and access module constants and custom types from within the

>     methods of the module itself and will be implemented using ``HPyField``s.

Reviewer 3: I think that saying "will be implemented using `HPyField`s" is a bit incorrect. A more correct sentence would be "you will be able to use `HPyFields` to store long-lived references to python objects" but I don't think it's necessary to specify that, especially if we decide to kill the reference to `HPyField` as my suggestion above. However, I think we need to include links to [PEP 573](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0573/) and [PEP 630](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0630/) which are relevant.

Suggestion:
> Implement isolated module level state, to avoid using C `static` global variables. This will basically be the HPy equivalent of PEP 573 and PEP 630.
